## Knithub: Where Fiber Art Meets Information Technology
Say Say

Dr Bradly Alicea

IS340 Project Management

10 May 2024

### Abstract
This paper is my submission of the final assignment about a hypothetical project called Knithub—a crossover of my studies as an Information Science student and my favorite hobby of crocheting and crafting. I discuss the inspiration behind the project by providing background on why it is something that is worth pursuing while keeping in mind the open-source principles emphasized in class. I describe the functions and features of the project, clarifying their purposes and the overall project vision. The bulk of the paper addresses the implementation and management of the project, with respect to key course concepts regarding project scope, technology stack and technical debt, open-source collaboration, and community management. Moreover, I emphasize the importance of privacy and security, as well as the overall purpose and goals of the platform. The website is the introduction to a new mode in which people can share or discover fiber related projects, and it can be considered an overall revitalization of crafting.

### Background
Since the pandemic, fiber art forms have emerged as an increasingly popular pastime. After facing cautionary instructions to remain home and mitigate the spread of the COVID-19 virus, many people across the world began learning new skills and acquiring new hobbies. Crocheting, knitting, and everything under the fiber arts umbrella became a staple activity that almost anyone could pick up. The BBC reported that multiple craft stores saw an increase in sales, providing various examples including how in August of 2021, a store called John Lewis experienced a 36% increase in crochet hook sales and a 14% increase in yarn sales (Silver, 2021). Yarn is typically purchased in the colder months to make warm items, so this sale increase suggests a revival of the knitting and crocheting hobbies. Not only is fiber art a reliable mode of self-expression, but it is time consuming in a worthwhile manner. Crafters started sharing their hard work online, making their own social media accounts for the specific purpose of posting images of their projects. This created larger and multiple niche communities that understood the effort it took to make anything from simple winter accessories to giant crochet sculptures. What was typically regarded as a dying hobby, or one that is attributed to elderly people, has transformed into something entirely savvy, with limitless boundaries for creation. With that in mind, I drafted a project that would serve as a larger space for all things fiber art related. Knithub is an inclusive space for fiber artists, curious crafters, and anyone else in between.

### Project Vision
Knithub is an all-encompassing website for all fiber art needs. Many crafters find themselves in need of a tutorial, written pattern, or could use some helpful tricks to improve their hobby. The website will address these needs in an encouraging manner and provide various ways in which crafters can explore further upon their own creative projects. Although this project is based on recreational activities and does not have the influence that other projects have, it is still a worthwhile pursuit due to the large number of people interested in crafting. The communities already exist, it is just a matter of bridging them together into a large, diverse network. Although it is understood that this project will serve crafters—those that are interested in the fiber arts—it should also be understood that anyone can become a part of the community. There are no entry requirements, and the website can be used for various reasons exceeding the scope of crafting. People may find viewing tutorials as a form of entertainment or learn more about how one business owner runs their small operation. The primary feature of Knithub is a search engine with an accompanying database that stores written patterns, video and photo tutorials, and any other accessible media that can help answer any fiber art related question. Unlike searching up fiber art materials on existing search engines, Knithub’s database will focus only on fiber art, making it more precise and less sporadic. We will compile the database keeping in mind the open-source elements of datasets. The website will also promote the sharing of personal projects, patterns and tutorials, and the overall socialization with other crafters. Thus, there will be a user profile component where users can personalize their accounts and participate in certain conversations. The website will be a way for crafters to not only get their questions answered, but a mode in which they can find inspiration. It will encourage people to try something new, or help others solve their crafting problems. Knithub will also be a friendly space for experienced crafters that have already built their own brands. They might find more success in sharing or promoting their small businesses and blogs with a larger audience. Knithub will not only be a search engine, but a community of diverse fiber artists—both novice and professional. The project aims to also bridge together its contributors, who may or may not share the same crafting interests. Contributors must be able to collaborate with one another without losing sight of the project’s goals. Even if they do not come up with a finalized version of the website within a certain timeframe, it is more important to keep in mind the workflows of the contributors and their established values, as release dates can always be pushed back. The personal goal of Knithub is to see a steady growth in user profiles and website engagement. After a year of the latest version being released, we would like to see at least 10,000 active users. Of course, these metrics can be determined later through the help of automation.

### Strategy
The overall goals of Knithub are ambitious and will not be completed in one attempt. In order to bring the project vision to life, the implementation must be carried out in phases. Features such as the vast database that is expected to retrieve answers efficiently and correctly for users will take a long time to establish. Therefore, it is very ideal that we begin with a simple search engine that can handle the more common questions posed by fiber artists. The first iteration of the website will be composed of only the search engine and minimal features where the audience can learn more about fiber art. Once the foundation of a robust database is established, we will continue refining it, relying on database professionals and search engine optimization experts. We will gradually incorporate the functions and features in following iterations, finishing off with the user profile component. Naturally, the Knithub search engine will undergo many iterations. This highlights the need of versioning. Each iteration will be documented and compared to the latest iteration. Version-control will also contribute to establishing accountability by tracking who is responsible for what contribution.

### Technology
In order to develop a robust database for the Knithub search engine, several backend contributors are necessary. Although it is more time consuming to manually clean data, it is preferred over relying on data cleaning software to ensure accuracy and to establish a form of accountability regarding the content that is shown to Knithub users. The more contributors we have, the more efficient the data cleaning process may occur. A general list of contributor profiles include frontend and backend developers, search engine optimization experts, fiber art bloggers, and moderators. The source code for much of this work will be available to the public, including the datasets that have been cleaned. This can be viewed as a separate resource for others that want to pursue different projects that require a large database of crafting media. It is essential that those doing the data cleaning are thorough, which is why collaborating with other fiber artists and bloggers should assist in the process. They have the experience to identify which data items should be sorted where depending on the crafting content. Furthermore, the backend teams can implement processes of automation in small increments to help them communicate with other contributors to verify the status of certain data sets. Automation can also be used to determine quality metrics and reasonable goals to set for the growth of the platform. However, we do not want to rely too heavily on automation as the project will start off on a small-scale. If there is a growth in our community and it becomes necessary to automate certain parts of our project, we will do this with careful deliberation, consulting all of those that will be affected by the automation. Although the structure of the database will be open source and available to those that want to develop their own search engine, some form of data protection provisions must take place. As mentioned in the Project Vision section, user profiles are another feature of Knithub. Thus, the data related to users’ sensitive information will be carefully encrypted and will not be used by the project for further gains. Knithub will prioritize the safety and security of its users while the general aspects of the project remain freely available to edit or remix. Regarding frontend technology, the appearance of the website is a crucial factor not just to entice users, but to fit the vision of the crafting-based platform. Creativity, self-expression, and encouragement are primary themes to keep in mind when designing the visual aspects of the website. The interface must be easy to navigate so that audiences of various age can learn to access and use the site, but there may be instances where certain features might evade the knowledge of younger or older users. In that case, they will have to refer to the support section of the website. The user interaction/user experience aspect of the project is just as important as the robust database because it will be the reason that people stay on the website when the search engine isn’t something they need to utilize. With consideration to the goals of the backend and frontend development teams, the technology stack will consist of MySQL, GitHub, Discord, Python, and JavaScript. This stack is subject to change upon further research and initial iterations of the platform. The contributors will determine which technology stack will be best suited to achieve the goals of the project with respect to mitigating technical debt. Since it is an unavoidable debt, it is more important to curb the technology cost while prioritizing the functionality of the website. Technical debt is also better managed when addressed in the beginning. Overall, there should be minimal debt with the initial phases of the project as we are starting off with smaller goals. 

### Security
As previously mentioned in the last section of the paper, data security provision will take place due to the user profile component of the platform. The safety and security of the Knithub user community is of the utmost importance. User profiles are an important feature that can greatly help establish an inclusive crafting community where people can socialize with others and improve upon their crafts. Thus, account security and the safety of user’s personal information must be prioritized. Encryption protocols should be carefully drafted using current standards so that the website can ensure the safety and privacy of users’ information. Users may also customize their privacy setting, although the project does not currently want to collect data from users other than the ones that measure the overall amount of time spent on the website and the number of active users. Again, users will be made aware of all these privacy decisions and will always be given the option to refuse. Moreover, participants will be provided with guidelines for safe and respectful conduct which they must follow in order to continue as a user of the platform. Moderators will work to enforce the guidelines and dispute any discrepancies brought to light by other users. They can communicate directly with the user whose conduct is in violation with our guidelines and they will also work to update the guidelines as needed. Moderators are crucial in the beginning stages of the website community building so that they can shape the way that users are supposed to interact with one another and immediately denounce any unwanted behaviors. By assessing the social environment of the website as well as securing the internal data, users should feel welcome to join the platform and become part of a community that supports their interests while upholding secure privacy measures.

### Community
Perhaps one of the most important components of managing Knithub, the community will require special focus and attention. Although anyone can join our project, we will begin by relying on social media to scope out potential contributors. We want to recruit well-versed professionals, but also creatives that can help develop the website within our project vision. Crafters can better identify what it is that fellow crafters want in an all-encompassing fiber art website. The initial community may be small or large but overtime it will be better to have a small community that gathers feedback from a larger audience. This is because many opinions can clash when developing something creative. We want to maintain the core goals and values of Knithub, and it may be more challenging for a larger community to dispute subjective matters. Furthermore, there are various elements of the project that will call for close collaboration between multiple contributors, especially the overall design of the website. Thus, teams will be implemented with respect to different specialties. Team members are not restricted to their respective team. For example, backend contributors can work with the frontend team to determine which functions are most feasible. To help organize and accomplish such processes, workflow process maps will be used to draft the necessary steps. An example of a workflow process map for managing the content of the website would begin with monitoring the content and gathering feedback from users. There are bound to be requests for certain features or mentions of bugs that need to be addressed. Once these issues are identified, proposals of changes or fixes would have to be carefully created. Then, a review stage occurs where collaborators determine if the proposal is worth pursuing. Lastly, the changes would be implemented. It is important to note that many of these steps within the map can have another workflow process within them. Defining tasks and the order in which to complete them will make the work environment efficient and stable. Although working in teams is a major component of the project, it is also understood that collaborators can work on the project at their own pace. With respect to the open-source aspect of the project development, there will be flexibility among contributors and soft deadlines as to when certain tasks must be completed. To assist in this task-tracking, Kanban boards will be utilized. As previously mentioned, the project will be carried out in phases. Thus, new Kanban boards will be created with each phase. For documentation purposes, the usage of workflow maps and Kanban boards will help in organizing when certain features came about, who contributed to them, and how the tasks were completed. For the Knithub open-source community, we will implement the Contributor Covenant to establish a professional, collaborative, and respectful contributor environment prior to the contributors themselves joining the community. In this Contributor Covenant, we will establish our values and our current standards for mitigating misconduct in explicit detail. Open Standards will also be utilized for future updates to our code of conduct as well as ensuring its quality. It is more convenient to rely on a platform like Open Standards because it is freely available to adopt and many of its standards align with current professional standards. It is also uniformly managed across organizations, which is one less thing for the project contributors to worry about. In order to maintain engagement within our community, we will implement surveys and hold meetings to assess the overall state of the community. Contributors will also be provided incentives, such as public events that will reinforce their shared passions and interests.

### Conclusion
Although I have had minimal experience with project management, I have learned a great deal about managing open-source projects. The pillars of open source include publicly available source code, copyleft licensing, free distribution, technology neutral, and versioning all align with the ways in which Knithub will operate. Other values we discussed regarded community cultivation and management, working collaboratively through organizational means, and utilizing automation where it best fits. The overarching goal of my project is for it to be an all-inclusive space for anyone that could possibly be interested in the fiber arts. I want to make crafting accessible and free in the same manner that open-source is accessible and reliable. Rather than creating something to profit from those that are simply trying to learn something new or improve upon something that they do for fun, I believe it is more important to create a resource that can serve people of various ages and skill level. Knithub is a representation of all the smaller social media accounts of those that randomly picked up a fiber art. It is also a representation of all the small businesses that sell at local markets. Knithub seeks to uplift these individuals and their hobbies so that they may find others that share their same creative goals and journeys. Whether or not the project grows as large as we envision it to, it is more important that the platform exists and is reliable. The functions of the database will be something novel, even if it is not well known. A project such as Knithub can only be developed with the pillars of open source and the values discussed in class.  

### References
Silver, K. (2021, November 19). How pandemic burnout sparked a knitting revival. https://www.bbc.com/news/business-59291962
